{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dirichlet-Multinomial Mixed Effect Models to Determine Changes in Mutational Signatures\
\
The relative contribution of mutational processes to the mutation toll of a cancer genome is often studied through the proxy of mutational signature exposures. Although they have been shown to be useful in patient stratification and in understanding the aethiology of tumours, the methods to analyse these quantities have often been inadequate. Precisely because they are relative quantities - compositional data - the statistical methods to analyse them have to be amenable to their characteristics of non-negativity and total sum constraint. I show how the Dirichlet Multinomial distribution can be used in the context of regression to model the mutational landscape of tumours. In particular, I show how the relative activity of mutational processes changes over time from early (clonal) to late (subclonal) mutations, in a pan-cancer analysis of whole genome sequences (PCAWG). I use a mixed effects Dirichlet-Multinomial model, which captures well the variety of correlations between mutational processes, includes patient-specific intercepts, and which allows for overdispersion, which we expect to find in analysing tumours sequenced in bulk. Our results show that, besides exogenous mutational processes, there are coordinated shifts in activity in endogenous or lesser-studied mutational signatures in \
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \outl0\strokewidth0 The relative contribution of mutational processes to the mutation toll of a cancer genome is often studied through the proxy of mutational signature exposures. Although they have been shown to be useful in patient stratification and in understanding the aethiology of tumours, the methods to analyse these quantities have often been inadequate. Precisely because they are relative quantities - compositional data - the statistical methods to analyse them have to be amenable to their characteristics of non-negativity and total sum constraint. I show how the Dirichlet Multinomial distribution can be used in the context of regression to model the mutational landscape of tumours. In particular, I show how the relative activity of mutational processes changes over time from early (clonal) to late (subclonal) mutations, in a pan-cancer analysis of whole genome sequences (PCAWG). I use a mixed effects Dirichlet-Multinomial model, which captures well the variety of correlations between mutational processes, includes patient-specific intercepts, and which allows for overdispersion, which we expect to find in analysing tumours sequenced in bulk. Our results show that, besides exogenous mutational processes, there are coordinated shifts in activity in endogenous or lesser-studied mutational signatures in\outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 Kidney\uc0\u8722 RCC.clearcell very many samples
\f0\fs24 \cb1 \
LIVER HCC very many samples\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 Lymph\uc0\u8722 CLL  there is a clear change in one sig
\f0\fs24 \cb1 \
}